How we make,remember,and forget memories?

  Human memory happens in many parts of brian at once,and some types of memories stick around longer than others.
  From the moment we born, our brains are bombarded by an immense amounts of information about ourselves and the world around us. So, 
how do we hold on to everything we've learned and experienced? Memories.
  Humans retain different types of memories for different lengths of time. Short-term memories last seconds to hours, while long-term memories last for years. We also 
have a working memory, which lets us keep something in our minds for limited time by repeating it. Whenever you say a phone number to yourself over and over to remember
it, you're using your working memory.
  Another way to categorize memories is by the subject of the memory itself, and whether you are consciously aware of it. Declarative memory, also called explicit memory,
consists of the sorts of memories you experience consciously. Some of these memories are facts or "common knowledge": things like the capital of Portugal, or experienced
, such as a childhood birthday.
  Nondeclarative memory, also called implict memory, unconsciously builds up. These include procedural memories, which your body uses to remember the skills you've 
learned. Do you play an instrument or ride a bicycle? Those are your procedural memories at work. Nondeclarative memories also can shape your body's unthinking responses,
like salivating at sight of you favourite food or tensing up when you see something you fear.
  In general, declarative memories are easier tp form than nondeclarative memories. It takes less time to memorize a country's capital than it does to learn how to play
the violin. But nondeclarative memories stick around more easily. Once you've learned to ride a bicycle, you're not likely to forget.
The type of amnesia
  To understand how we remember things, it's incredibly helpful to study how we forget-which is why neuroscientists study amnesia, the loss of memories or memories or the
ability to learn. Amnesia is usually the result of some kind of trauma to the brain, such as a head injury, a stroke, a brain tumor, or chronic alcoholism.
  These are tow main thyes of amnesia. The first, retrograde amnesia, occurs where you forget things you knew before the brain trauma. Anterograde amnesia is when brain 
trauma curtails or stops someone's ability to form memories.
  The most famous case study of anterograde amnesia is Henry Molasion, who in 1953 had parts of his brain removed as a last-ditch treatment for severe seizures. While 
Molasion - known when he was alive as H.M - remembered much of his childhood, he was unable to form new declarative memories. People who worked with him for decades had 
to re-introduce themselves with every visit.
  By studying people such as H.M, as well as animals with different type of brain damage, scientists can trace where and how different kinds of memories form in the brain.
It seems that short-term and long-term mrmories don't form in exactly the same way, nor do declarative and procedural memories.
  There's no one place within the brain that holds all of your memories; different areas of the brain form and store different kinds of memories, and different processes
may be at play for each. For instance, emotional responses such as fear reside in brain region called the amygdala. Memories of the skills you've learned are associated 
with a different region called the striatum. A region called the hippocampus is curcial for forming, retaining, and recalling declarative memories. The temporal lobes, the
temporal lobes, the brain regions that H.M. was partially missing, play a curcial role in forming and recalling memories.
How memories are formed, stord, and recalled
  Since the 1940s scientists have surmised that memories are held within group of neurons, or nerve cell, called cell assemblies. Those interconnected cells fire as a 
group in response to a specific stimulus, whether it's your friend's face or the smell of freshly baked bread. The more the neurons fire together, the more cells' 
interconnections strengthen. That way, when a future stimulus triggers the cells, it's more lkiely that the whole assembly fires. The nerves' collective activity 
transcribes what we experience as a memory. Scientists are still working through the details of how it works.
  For a short-term memory to become a long-term memory, it must be strengthened for long-term storage, a process called memory consolidation. Consolidation is thought
to take place by several processes. One, called long-term potentiation, consists of individual nerves modifying themseleves to grow and talk to their neighboring 
nerves differently. That remodeling alters the nerves' collections in the long term, which stabilizes the memory. All animals that have long-term memories use this
same basic cellular machinery; scientists worked out the details of long-term potentiation by studying California sea slugs. However, not all long-term memories necessarily
have to start as short-term memories.
  As we recall a memory, many parts of our brain rapidly talk to each other, including regions in the brain's cortex that do high-level information processing, regoins
that handle our senses' raw inputs, and a region called the medial temporal lobe that seems to help coordinate the process. One recent study found that at the moment 
when patients recalled newly formed memories, ripples of nerve activity in the medial temporal lobe synced up with ripples in the brain's cortex.
  Many mysteries of memory remain. How precisely are memories encoded within groups of neurons? How widely distributed in the brain are the cells tha encode a given memory?
How does our brain activity correspond to how we experience memories? These active areas of research may one day provide new sight into brain function and how to treat
memory-related conditions.
  For instance, recent work has demonstrated that some memories must be "reconsolidated" each time they're recalled. If so, the act of remembering something makes that
memory temporarily malleable - letting it be strengthened, weakened, or otherwise altered. Memories may be more easily targeted by medications during reconsolidated,
which could help treat condition such as post-traumatic stress disorder, or PTSD.
