Veggie-eating shark surprises scientsits

	It turns out they can also fast for months on end. But why?

	Whale sharks are the largest fish in the sea, though as filter feeders, they don't have the same bloodthirsty reputation as their kin. Still, they are sharks, so it's
long been believed these gentle gaints rely almost exclusively on animal protein.
	That's not what an intriguing new study published this month in the journal Ecological Monographs found, though. Careful investigation of blood and tissue samples from
over a dozen whale shark suggests that they actually have a pretty omnivorous diet tha includes plants and algae.
	The research team, led by University of Tokyo biologist Alex Wyatt, used a combination of samples form captive and wild sharks to demystify the feeding habits of these
enigmatic ocean travellers. While previous studies had found seaweed in whale stomachs, this is the first study to suggest they might ingest such algae as a dietary staple.
	"Whale sharks are a very charismatic creature that is globally threatened, but we still don't konw enough about their ecology for effective conservation," Wyatt tells
National Geographic. "I an very keen to contribute to an imporved understanding of the species."
	Stydying what an animal eats is "fundational stuff," says whale shark biologist and vice president of research and conservation at the Georgia Aquarium Alistair Dove, 
but "it's also central to the sort of population models that are necessary when you trying to develop enlightened vonservation plans for an endangered species."
	Those making conservation decisions need concrete information about a species' habit, including details like how individuals move around and what they need to eat, to 
determine the best way to protect it. Tagging studies have elucidated the movement piece of the puzzle, but it's basically impossible to follow these very mobile fish around
all the time to see what they're eating. And that's why Wyatt and his team's aproach is so appealing - it uses samples of blood and other tissues that can be opportunistically
collected to look back at what an animal has been eating. "It's a great addition to knowledge of whale shark foraging and diet," says Clare Prebble, a senior scientist with
the Marine Megafauna Foundation.
Feast or famine lifestyle
	To determine what the animals eat, the research team measured the different forms, or isotopes, of key atoms like nitrogen and carbon in the blood and tissue samples.
The proportion of these isotopes differs in dirrerent food sources like algae, zooplankton, and fish, so looking at the ratios of these atoms in the sharks' tissues can tell
researchers a lot about what the animals are eating.
	There's usually a bit of a catch, though. While stable isotopes are frequently used to infer animal diets, the method often ralies on making assumptions about how the
animals process the nutrients from their foods. But this study was able to use five captive whale sharks with known diets from th Okivawa Churaumi Aquarium to ground-truth their
data from eight wild animals. "It's an epic amount of work that really nicely takes what we can learn from animals in aquariums and applies it to what we want to know about
that same species in its natural setting," says Dove.
	Like the marine mammals they're name after, whale sharks are huge. They can grow to be almost 40  feet long and weight nearly 50,000 pounds. You'd think it takes a lot
of food to support so much body mass - and it dows. But the researchers found that the beasts can also go for four months or more without eating. That's probably because
they don't eat while on the move, Wyatt say - perhaps because there isn't anything worth stopping for along the way.
	Prolonged fasting makes a lot of sense when you thinl about the animals' environment, says Prebble. "Food availability in the open ocean is very patchy, so it would be a 
good strategy for them to gorge themselves when food is abundant, hen use that energy to sustain them through periods of travelling or searching to find their next seafood
buffet," she says.
	BNut not all the animals showed signs of big gaps between meals. There was a lot of variation between individuals, something that Prebble and Dove both found intriguing.
That may suggest that individual sharks specialize on fedding in certain areas or on certain foods. And in general, they just seem to eat a wider variety of things than anyone
realized.
Eat food, a lot when you can ... mostly plants?
	According to Wyatt's data, the animals are getting half or more their nutrients from plants and algae. So why would whale sharks comsume a large amount of algal matter?
There are a few possible explanations.
	"It is unclear if this is actually beneficial, or even a choice that whale sharks make," says Syatt. "But it is plausible that algal material coule provide a food source when
other prey are limited."
	"It makes sense that whale sharks might ingest a lot of plant matter given that their fedding method discriminates particles by size, not by species," Dove says. That's what 
a 2013 study concluded when researchers noted that marine algae has often been found in whale shark stomachs. But this new data shows the animals are using a lot of nutrients
from the algae they conxume, which could suggest a more vegetarian diet isn't accidental.
	To determine whether whale sharks are accidental or intentional omnivores, researches will have to see whether the animals target areas with algae even in the absence of
potential animal-based food. They'll also need to study how effectively whale sharks use nutrients from algae. That's what biologists did when bonnethead sharks kept turning
up with seagrass in their digestive systems, and to their surpise, they found the animals do actually digest the grass thanks to special enzymes in their stomachs.
	Dove says he wouldn't be surpise if whale sharks are true omnivores. "the closest relatives of whale sharks are bottom-dwelling species, and I fully expect some of them turn
out to be omnivores too," he says. "That's the fascinating thing about sharks. The more we loot at them, the more they challenge our basic accumptions about their biology, and
that makes them one of the most exciting groups of animals to study." 
