India is in a historic water crisis

	The ambitious plan is running up against environmental concerns.
	Prem Singh's farm thrives along the dusty banks of the River Ken. Strangled by years of drought, the river's currents have ebbed. Local well levels have dropped by 
as much as 85 feet. Grain farmers are abandoning their fields and moving to cities. SOme even have committed suicide. But Singh's intermixed plot of mango trees, row of
garlic bulbs, and cow milking sheds loom in the heat waves like a lush oasis. He is debt-free - the dream of farmers anywhere on the globe - and turning a good profit.
"The Green Revolution took away our self-sufficiency," said Singh, referring to genetically modified crops, and chemical fetilizers to the region more than a quarter of
a century ago. "I sold my tractor. I now use buffalo to plow. I harvest plenty of rain in a pond. I'm much better off than most of my neibors."
	Yet Singh't small-is-beautiful vision is colliding today with one of the biggest and most aduacious water projects in the world: The Indian government plans to siphon 
off the Ken's currents to refill a nearby river that it maintains is even drier, the Betwa. This land-scape-scaled transfusion is part of an unprecedented river linking
program that ultimately hopes to graft together 30 major Indian rivers through more than 9,000 miles of concrete cannals.
	The rationale? Indaia today faces a water emergency of historic proportions, with an estimated 600 million people - about half the population - grappling with either 
severe water shortages or polluted water supplies. Government engineers propose to ease the crisis by shunting "excess" water from one riverbed to another, a colossal refit
of nature's designs that also could help control monsoon flooding, boost irrigation, and generate hydropower for the country's water-thirsty citizens. "The Indian government
plans to achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all by 2030," Nitin Gadkari, the minister of Water Resources, River Development and
Ganga Rejuvenation, promised at a recent water conference. The governments's own experts are less optimistic. A federally funded think tank warned last year that water demand 
in Indian actually will swell to double the country's available suppplies by the same year.
	Humankind's re-plumbing of the world's riverways is nothing new, of course. A recent World Wildlife Fund study found that only a third of the planet's longest rivers still
qualify as free-flowing. The Colorado River and its tributaries have been dammed so many hundreds of times that the American river often expires with a parched gasp at the 
Mexican border. And during the Soviet era, Russia planned to funnel the volume of the entire Siberian rivers to cotton fields thousands of miles away in Central Asia, using
canals gouged by atom bomb blasts.
	indial's version of river roulette is nearly as ambitious. So far, Delhi has earmarked $2.25 billion for implementing its Interlinking of River scheme. Diverting water 
from the Ken to quench the Betwa is the first test case to be budgeted. The two rivers, both tributaries of the Ganges, would be joined by 144 miles of canals. Two dams flooding
23 square miles of land are required for the engineering. Environmentalists vow to fight the project in court.
	"Where is all of this excess water?" said Raghu Chundawat, a leading India conservationist. "The government won't share its flow data. I don't think even they know what impacts
will be." Chundawat noted that most of the land to be inundated by the Ken-Betwa linking project lies within Panna National Park, one of India's reserves for endangered tigers.
	DownStream on the Ken, farmer Singh preaches far smaller-scale solutions. Working with local agricultural activists and the government, he has promoted the digging of more than
8,000 rainwater ponds during the past decade. Many neighbors are adopting his sustainable practices of dividing farm acreage into four entwined ruses: a third for fruit trees, 
athird for ground crops a third for animals, and the rest for surface water storage. He processes his crops on site - pickled mangoes - adding value. He even has erected a tiny
museum of human history called the Humane Agrarian Center. In it, happy farmers occupy the apex of evolution. Drawing on the tiny rain catchment of his farm, he suffers no water
shortages.
	"Farmers tell me that more than anything I say, it's the climate that has made them converts," Singh said, noting how the flow fo the Ken River has grown more erratic as
global warming disrupts India's rain patterns. "It's a time for personal choices," he said/l "Not big river projects." And out beyond his cool orchards stretched the hot fields - 
flattened by tractors and 11,000 years of decisions made since the first seed was planted.