  Human memory happens in many parts of brian at once,and some types of memories stick around longer than others.
  From the moment we born, our brains are bombarded by an immense amounts of information about ourselves and the world around us. So, 
how do we hold on to everything we've learned and experienced? Memories.
  Humans retain different types of memories for different lengths of time. Short-term memories last seconds to hours, while long-term memories last for years. We also 
have a working memory, which lets us keep something in our minds for limited time by repeating it. Whenever you say a phone number to yourself over and over to remember
it, you're using your working memory.
  Another way to categorize memories is by the subject of the memory itself, and whether you are consciously aware of it. Declarative memory, also called explicit memory,
consists of the sorts of memories you experience consciously. Some of these memories are facts or "common knowledge": things like the capital of Portugal, or experienced
, such as a childhood birthday.
  Nondeclarative memory, also called implict memory, unconsciously builds up. These include procedural memories, which your body uses to remember the skills you've 
learned. Do you play an instrument or ride a bicycle? Those are your procedural memories at work. Nondeclarative memories also can shape your body's unthinking responses,
like salivating at sight of you favourite food or tensing up when you see something you fear.
  In general, declarative memories are easier tp form than nondeclarative memories. It takes less time to memorize a country's capital than it does to learn how to play
the violin. But nondeclarative memories stick around more easily. Once you've learned to ride a bicycle, you're not likely to forget.
The type of amnesia
  To understand how we remember things, it's incredibly helpful to study how we forget-which is why neuroscientists study amnesia, the loss of memories or memories or the
ability to learn. Amnesia is usually the result of some kind of trauma to the brain, such as a head injury, a stroke, a brain tumor, or chronic alcoholism.
  These are tow main thyes of amnesia. The first, retrograde amnesia, occurs where you forget things you knew before the brain trauma. Anterograde amnesia is when brain 
trauma curtails or stops someone's ability to form memories.
  The most famous case study of anterograde amnesia is Henry Molasion, who in 1953 had parts of his brain removed as a last-ditch treatment for severe seizures.
